---
layout: post
title: "Recapping a Year..."
language: en
categories:
  - Summary
---

This year begun, as most years do, as an extension over the days and
projects over the previous one. At least, that's what it was for me.
But it amplified the previous one in so many ways. Personal projects
have become more amplified, and I hope 2019 to be the natural
consequence of publishing some results soon.

<!--more-->

There are so many things that deserve a post here that don't still
have got one that I'm a bit ashamed of the poor care that I've taken
on my blogsite.

I have never been a great carer for a blog, and this is actually my
fourth attempt, but it's always been due to different reasons, so I
hope I can finally begin to adapt now.

But let's first recap the year (and eventually bring full posts for
the relevant issues, but at least let's get the summaries!):

## Trackula

There are so many things this year related to Trackula that I must
present something from 2017 that I haven't yet posted about in this
blog.

But I have recently set up its own blog so that its roadmap can be
seen there (soon). You can visit https://trackula.org and the staging
site is at https://trackula.gitlab.io/blog.trackula.org while we
migrate.

## FOSDEM 2018

As most years, I attended FOSDEM last year. Curiously enough, being
based in Madrid, that I had to travel circa 4000km to meet some other
*madrileños* that were also attending. And this was the first time
that I was together with people from GPUL and OpenShine both since
GUADEC 2012. Vegan food as delicious as always, and the FOSDEM team
still making one of the best FOSS-related events that I've assisted
to, this was just another memorable FOSDEM edition.

## Spanish Data Protection Agency awards Trackula

We received a research award from the Spanish Data Protection Agency
for our work on Trackula and a memoir we wrote stating the state of
the art in technology and its relationship with Law in the months
prior to the GDPR coming to full effect. A corrected copy of this
report will also be soon released.

## Hirikilabs: Privacy, the GDPR, mass surveillance...

From our work on Trackula (which I still owe at least a full post
about the process at Medialab Prado and another one about our work for
the Spanish Control Authority), we came to meet some great guys from
Donostia that run a citizen's laboratory (that's what Hirikilabs is in
Euskera) in a great space for creativity. They hosted a series of
talks about privacy, and Sofia and I came to talk about the GDPR and
advocate for regulating privacy and raising awareness over the state
of the issue. A much interesting story that ended up with an
invitation for...

## Summerlab 2018 at Hirikilabs

We were invited to participate in the Summerlab with other groups. Our
workshop was titled "Cookifying the Real World", and we created some
real-world tracking devices from ESP8266 hardware and LiPo cells,
which we used to track the assistants through the building and present
them the results at the end of the workshop, in order to experiment
with the feeling of being watched. It was a complete success for what
was expected, and our experiment generated great engagement from the
audience. We will soon publish a series of posts in the trackula blog
over how everything came to place, the code, the STL files, the email
templates we used, and everything in general needed to replicate the
experience. Thanks to everyone that made this possible!

## PyConES2018 - Málaga

OpenShine is a long time sponsor of PyConES, and this year we went to
Malaga to the event. This was my worst FOSS event experience so far,
and by far. The organization has no fucking idea and won't listen to
feedback from last years. This is inadmissible when you see it's the
same people running it this year and making even worse mistakes. But I
won't rant in this short space, I'll hope to have a post eventually on
that.

## Open source contributions

Last year I managed to fix streaming on Spark-on-k8s internally for a
project I was leading at OpenShine, but since the rebases on top of
Apache Spark were already in progress, I was asked by the spark-on-k8s
community to put the fix to the community on hold until this was
already sorted out. So I finally made the contribution this year after
sitting on it for over ~400 days (unfortunate timing, I guess, but I
had streaming before you did).

We also open-sourced some work I led on Kafka Streams for Scala (which
I would love to turn into a KIP) and on Elasticsearch query cost
measurements (we needed to symbolically estimate the cost of queries
before running them, because the product needed to expose parts of the
query interface to an "untrusted user").

I will entertain a talk on this cost analyzer, dubbed
[escova](https://github.com/openshine/escova) at FOSDEM 2019 in the
Search devroom.

# New Year's wishes

This year I'll be attending FOSDEM as a speaker for the first time, so
first of all, I hope everything goes alright!

Given the state of things with [Facebook last
year](https://www.reddit.com/r/StallmanWasRight/comments/acuct5/facebook_2018_year_in_review/)
I sincerely hope this year is a bit better for privacy and regulation
on that. I hope Trackula can help with all of that, and we have
incorporated an Association with that purpose.

I hope to have more time to write on the awesome things that happen
near me, and to give time and value to those issues that really matter.

Have a great one,

Santiago

